Blog post about using Istio multi-mesh for isolation and boundary protection (#4776)
istio/istio.io: content/en/blog/2019/isolated-clusters/index.md

different functionality and API than the `withdraw` services in the `accounts` namespace in other meshes.
Such situation could happen in an organization where there is no uniform policy on naming of namespaces and services, or
when the meshes belong to different organizations.
- **expose-nothing by default**. None of the services in a mesh are exposed by default, the mesh owners must
explicitly specify which services are exposed.
- **boundary protection**. The access control of the traffic must be enforced at the ingress gateway, which stops
forbidden traffic from entering the mesh. This requirement implements
[Defense-in-depth principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defense_in_depth_(computing)) and is part of some compliance
standards, such as the
[Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/).
- **common trust may not exist**. The Istio sidecars in one mesh may not trust the Citadel certificates in other
meshes, due to some security requirement or due to the fact that the mesh owners did not initially plan to federate
the meshes.

> - **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests to the exposed services in remote meshes using

Reviewer: Maybe reword this to a possible feature to leverage if user chooses to, assuming some users may prefer service location transparency, while some users may prefer to call specific services with the cluster/domain info.

> - **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests to the exposed services in remote meshes using

Author: @smawson @linsun I have changed the text to make "Service location transparency" optional: in e11f86a33b3558d7b0dc00d1d842136035fd8316 and 7dd447e938f4f4484b588a476eb89e0e50622a61.

local service names. The consuming services are oblivious to the fact that some of the destinations are in remote
meshes and some are local services. The access is uniform, using the local service names, for example, in Kubernetes,
`reviews.default.svc.cluster.local`.

While **expose-nothing by default** and **boundary protection** are required to facilitate compliance and improve
security, **non-uniform naming** and **common trust may not exist** are required when connecting
meshes of different organizations, or of an organization that cannot enforce uniform naming or cannot or may not

> establish common trust between the meshes. **Service location transparency** is important since you do not want to

Reviewer: is important when you do not want to...

Author: @linsun Addressed in 7dd447e.

---

> title: Use Istio multi-mesh deployments for isolation and boundary protection

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Multi-mesh deployments for isolation and boundary protection
```

> subtitle: Deploy environments that require isolation into separate meshes and enable inter-mesh communication by mesh federation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subtitle: Separate applications that require isolation into multiple meshes using mesh federation to enable inter-mesh communication
```

types of sensitive data they protect appear in the following table:

|Standard|Sensitive data|
| --- | --- |
|[PCI DSS](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security)|payment card data|
|[FedRAMP](https://www.fedramp.gov)|federal information, data and metadata|
|[HIPAA](http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/search/pagedetails.action?granuleId=CRPT-104hrpt736&packageId=CRPT-104hrpt736)|personal health data|
|[GDPR](https://gdpr-info.eu)| personal data|

[PCI DSS](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security), for example, recommends putting cardholder data
environment on a network, separate from the rest of the system. It also requires using a [DMZ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DMZ_(computing)),
and setting firewalls between the public Internet and the DMZ, and between the DMZ and the internal network.

Isolation of sensitive data environments from other information systems can reduce the scope of the compliance checks
and improve the security of the sensitive data. Reducing the scope reduces the risks of failing a compliance check and
reduces the costs of compliance since there are less components to check and secure, according to compliance
requirements.

> You can achieve isolation of sensitive data environments by deploying the applications that process the sensitive data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can achieve isolation of sensitive data by separating the parts of the application that process that data
```

> into {{< gloss "multi-mesh" >}}separate service meshes{{< /gloss >}}, preferably on separate networks. Then you can use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
into a separate service mesh, preferably on a separate network, and then connect the meshes with different
compliance requirements together in a {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployment.
```

> Istio to connect applications in the meshes with different compliance requirements. The process of connecting inter-mesh

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The process of connecting inter-mesh
```

applications is called {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}}.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Note that using mesh federation to create a multi-mesh deployment is very different than creating a
{{< gloss >}}multi-cluster{{< /gloss >}} deployment, which defines a single service mesh composed from services spanning more than one cluster. Unlike multi-mesh, a multi-cluster deployment is not suitable for
applications that require isolation and boundary protection.

```

> In this blog post I describe the requirements for isolation and boundary protection, and outline the principles of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this blog post I will describe the requirements for isolation and boundary protection, and outline the principles of
```

Author: @frankbu: @rcaballeromx does not like using future tense in the documents, like you propose "I will describe".

Reviewer 2: I think it reads better, but up to you.

> {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployments. Finally, I report the current state of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multi-mesh deployments. Finally, I'll describe the current state of the
```

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4776/commits/b47950c83e472a87ad20a0346201d2d70302d5ea and in https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4776/commits/c6720beabace7a940516577ab297a4f3450043f3.

> {{< gloss "mesh federation" >}}mesh-federation{{< /gloss >}} work in Istio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mesh-federation support and automation work under way for Istio.
```

systems into subsystems also supports the important security concepts of domain separation and network segmentation,
which can be significant when dealing with high value assets. When systems are divided into subsystems, organizations
may choose to develop individual subsystem security and privacy plans or address the system and subsystems in the same
security and privacy plans.
Information security and privacy architectures play a key part in the process of dividing complex systems into
subsystems. This includes monitoring and controlling communications at internal boundaries among subsystems and
selecting, allocating, and implementing controls that meet or exceed the security and privacy requirements of the
constituent subsystems.
{{< /quote >}}

Boundary protection, in particular, means:

- put an access control mechanism at the boundary (firewall, gateway, etc.)
- monitor the incoming/outgoing traffic at the boundary
- all the access control mechanisms must be _deny-all_ by default
- do not expose private IP addresses from the boundary
- do not let components from outside the boundary to impact security inside the boundary

> {{< gloss >}}Multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployments facilitate division of a system into subsystems with different

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Multi-mesh deployments facilitate division of a system into subsystems with different
```

the meshes.

While **expose-nothing by default** and **boundary protection** are required to facilitate compliance and improve
security, **non-uniform naming** and **common trust may not exist** are required when connecting
meshes of different organizations, or of an organization that cannot enforce uniform naming or cannot or may not
establish common trust between the meshes.

An optional feature that you may want to use is **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests
to the exposed services in remote meshes using local service names. The consuming services are oblivious to the fact
that some of the destinations are in remote meshes and some are local services. The access is uniform, using the local
service names, for example, in Kubernetes, `reviews.default.svc.cluster.local`.
**Service location transparency** is useful in the cases when you want to be able to change the location of the
consumed services, for example when some service is migrated from private cloud to public cloud, without changing the
code of your applications.

## The current mesh-federation work

> While you can perform {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}} using standard Istio configurations already today,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While you can perform mesh federation using standard Istio configurations already today,
```

it would require writing a lot of boiler-plate YAML files and could be error-prone. There is an effort under way to

> automate the {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}} process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
automate the mesh federation process.
```

> Before the automation of {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}} is released, and if you are curious, you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before the automation of mesh federation is released, and if you are curious, you
```

can check [multi-mesh deployment examples](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem/multi-mesh-examples) in
[Istio ecosystem](https://github.com/istio-ecosystem).

## Summary

In this blog post I described the requirements for isolation and boundary protection of sensitive data environments by

> using Istio {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployments. I outlined the principles of Istio

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using Istio multi-mesh deployments. I outlined the principles of Istio
```

> {{< gloss >}}multi-mesh{{< /gloss >}} deployments and reported the current work on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multi-mesh deployments and reported the current work on
```

> {{< gloss >}}mesh federation{{< /gloss >}} in Istio.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mesh federation in Istio.
```

which can be significant when dealing with high value assets. When systems are divided into subsystems, organizations
may choose to develop individual subsystem security and privacy plans or address the system and subsystems in the same
security and privacy plans.
Information security and privacy architectures play a key part in the process of dividing complex systems into
subsystems. This includes monitoring and controlling communications at internal boundaries among subsystems and
selecting, allocating, and implementing controls that meet or exceed the security and privacy requirements of the
constituent subsystems.
{{< /quote >}}

The approach I propose in this blog post facilitates division of a system into subsystems with different security and
compliance requirements, and facilitates the boundary protection.
You put each subsystem into a separate Kubernetes cluster, preferably on a separate network. You install
a dedicated Istio control plane into each cluster and connect the Istio meshes using ingress and egress gateways.
The gateways monitor and control cross-cluster traffic at the boundary of each cluster.

## Features of the proposed approach

> The approach I propose has the following features:

Author: @smawson Initially, I wrote this blog post as a possible implementation of Mesh Federation. Following the feedback I received, I removed all the referencing to Mesh Federation, and also any comparison with other multi-cluster patterns. So my blog post is more modest now, it talks about a concrete use case "connecting clusters with isolation and boundary protection", it does not propose a new architecture.

> - **non-uniform naming**. The `withdraw` service in the `accounts` namespace in one cluster might have

Reviewer 3: Please update the blog to indicate that we are explicitly treating these as separate meshes.

different functionality and API than the `withdraw` services in the `accounts` namespace in other clusters. The same

> service with the same functionality can have different names and can reside in different namespaces in different

Author: I propose to proceed in an agile manner: to publish a blog post about a concrete use case with a concrete implementation.
 
> So we can't talk about something like that in a blog post since we haven't agreed that we want to officially support that. 

Why? This is what blog posts are good for. This is not an official task or concept, it is an opinionated blog post. Note that this blog post uses Istio AS IS, it just shows possible usage of Istio to address a particular use case.
 
> It can introduce a lot of potential problems that I don't think we've fully thought through.

I am sorry, I do not think this is the right way to proceed. This is too waterfall, not agile at all. How can we think fully about some architecture pattern without seeing a single example of it? Why shouldn't we publish a blog post and collect user's feedback on that?

> service with the same functionality can have different names and can reside in different namespaces in different

Reviewer 3: We don't want to tell users about a pattern that we're not supporting. Please remove any discussion about a single service using different names in different clusters from this blog post.

clusters.
For example, the same service can be called `withdraw` and `withdraw-funds`, and can reside in the `accounts` and
`private-accounts` namespaces in different clusters. Such situation could happen in an organization where there is no
uniform policy on naming of namespaces and services, or when the clusters belong to different organizations.

> - **expose-nothing by default**. None of the services in a cluster are exposed by default, the cluster owners must

Author: @smawson So this is what I describe here, as you said:

> Services between meshes are not exposed by default, and must be explicitly exposed to other meshes.

> - **expose-nothing by default**. None of the services in a cluster are exposed by default, the cluster owners must

Reviewer 3: Please change the wording to indicate that these are treated as separate meshes, and those meshes do not expose anything to each other by default.

explicitly specify which services are exposed.

> - **boundary protection**. The access control of the traffic must be enforced at the ingress gateway, which stops

Author: Yes, mesh is a boundary and here I describe what it means concretely, that access control must be enforced at the ingress gateway.

> - **boundary protection**. The access control of the traffic must be enforced at the ingress gateway, which stops

Reviewer 3: Please state that access control is enforced at the ingress gateway of each mesh.

forbidden traffic from entering the cluster. This requirement implements
[Defense-in-depth principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Defense_in_depth_(computing)) and is part of some compliance
standards, such as the
[Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard](https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/).

> - **common trust may not exist**. The Istio sidecars in one cluster may not trust the Citadel certificates in other

Author: @smawson In the current version of the blog post I do not try to define mesh federation in general. I describe the features of the particular use case, and a possible implementation of a particular use case.

> - **common trust may not exist**. The Istio sidecars in one cluster may not trust the Citadel certificates in other

Reviewer 3: I'd rather you explicitly describe these as separate meshes. Not describing that makes it seem like this is creating a single mesh, and that is not what it is doing.

cluster, due to some security requirement or due to the fact that the cluster owners did not initially plan to couple
the clusters.

> - **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests to the exposed services in remote clusters using

Author: Here I describe my particular solution and do not try to define federation.

> - **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests to the exposed services in remote clusters using

Reviewer 3: Right, but this isn't a unique feature of anything described here. This is a general feature of Istio.

local service names. The consuming services are oblivious to the fact that some of the destinations are in remote
clusters and some are local services. The access is uniform, using the local service names of Kubernetes, for example `reviews.default.svc.cluster.local`.

While **expose-nothing by default** and **boundary protection** are required to facilitate compliance and improve
security, **non-uniform naming** and **common trust may not exist** are required when connecting
clusters of different organizations, or of an organization that cannot enforce uniform naming or cannot or may not
establish common trust between the clusters. **Service location transparency** is important since you do not want to
change the code of your applications when the location of the consumed services changes.

> ## The proposed implementation

Author: I propose to proceed in the opposite way, bottom up. Before defining what is mesh federation, let's see a concrete implementation (or set of alternative implementations if such will be proposed by other people). Then let's define the common principles for mesh federation and define what is mesh federation. In this blog post I provide a concrete working example of connecting two service meshes without providing definitions. You are welcome to define it as Mesh Federation or to call it some other concept. I just provide you a working example that you can reference when you discuss definitions of multi-cluster mesh and mesh federation. In your analogy to APIs and implementations - let's see a couple of concrete implementations first, and then define general APIs on top of them.

I propose to base connecting isolated clusters on the following principles:

- use **standard Istio mechanisms** such as gateways, virtual services, destination rules, RBAC.
- use **standard Istio installations**.
- **ad hoc cluster _pairing_** at any time. The owners of the clusters can install Istio and operate it independently,
  and decide to connect the clusters at some later point in time.
- **private gateways for cross-cluster communication**, with dedicated certificates and private keys. Only the gateways
  trust each other, there is no trust between sidecars from different clusters.

In the following sections I demonstrate connecting isolated clusters using two clusters and the Istio
[Bookinfo](/docs/examples/bookinfo/) application as an example.

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: @smawson PTAL at [this PR](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4788) which is trying to nail down these two terms in the glossary.

> ## Prerequisites

Author: @smawson I just tried to stay clear from providing any definitions.

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer 3: I want to avoid confusing readers. You are using the term cluster, and because you are not defining what it is, the reader has to guess. They may guess that this is a supported way to build a single mesh, and it is not. That's what I want to avoid by being explicit about exactly what this blog post is describing: An approach to link two meshes together to provide isolation.

    $ kubectl apply --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -l app=reviews,version=v3 -n bookinfo -f @samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml@
    $ kubectl apply --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -l service=reviews -n bookinfo -f @samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml@
    $ kubectl apply --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -l app=ratings -n bookinfo -f @samples/bookinfo/platform/kube/bookinfo.yaml@
    serviceaccount/bookinfo-details created
    serviceaccount/bookinfo-ratings created
    serviceaccount/bookinfo-reviews created
    serviceaccount/bookinfo-productpage created
    deployment.apps/reviews-v2 created
    deployment.apps/reviews-v3 created
    service/reviews created
    service/ratings created
    deployment.apps/ratings-v1 created
    {{< /text >}}

1.  Check the pods in the `bookinfo` namespace:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl get pods -n bookinfo --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2
    ratings-v1-85f65447f4-vk88z   2/2     Running   0          43s
    reviews-v2-5cfcfb547f-2t6l4   2/2     Running   0          50s
    reviews-v3-75b4759787-58wpr   2/2     Running   0          48s
    {{< /text >}}

    You should have three pods of the Bookinfo application.

> 1.  Create a service for reviews. Call it `myreviews`, to demonstrate that you can use different names for services in

Author: This is what I did in the blog post:

> Have ratings in one mesh and reviews in the other or something.

> 1.  Create a service for reviews. Call it `myreviews`, to demonstrate that you can use different names for services in

Author: @smawson I show two examples: a single service with different versions in different clusters, and two different services. This blog post is rather comprehensive, it shows multiple cases.

> 1.  Create a service for reviews. Call it `myreviews`, to demonstrate that you can use different names for services in

Reviewer 3: Please remove the use case with a single service with different versions in different meshes. That is not something we've discussed supporting with Istio, and I don't want readers to get the impression that it is a supported or expected practice.

    kind: DestinationRule
    metadata:
      name: ratings
    spec:
      host: ratings
      trafficPolicy:
        tls:
          mode: ISTIO_MUTUAL
      subsets:
      - name: v1
        labels:
          version: v1
    EOF
    {{< /text >}}

1.  Verify that `myreviews.bookinfo` works as expected:

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl exec -it $(kubectl get pod -l app=sleep -o jsonpath='{.items..metadata.name}' --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2) -c sleep --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -- curl myreviews.bookinfo:9080/reviews/0 -w "\nResponse code: %{http_code}\n"
    {"id": "0","reviews": [{  "reviewer": "Reviewer1",  "text": "An extremely entertaining play by Shakespeare. The slapstick humour is refreshing!", "rating": {"stars": 5, "color": "red"}},{  "reviewer": "Reviewer2",  "text": "Absolutely fun and entertaining. The play lacks thematic depth when compared to other plays by Shakespeare.", "rating": {"stars": 4, "color": "red"}}]}
    Response code: 200
    {{< /text >}}

The following diagram shows the state of the clusters after deploying the Bookinfo services:

{{< image width="100%" link="./MeshFederation1_bookinfo.svg" caption="Two clusters after initial setup" >}}

> ## Deploy private gateways for cross-cluster communication (one-time setup)

Author: @smawson I mention automation as the next step in the summary.

> ## Deploy private gateways for cross-cluster communication (one-time setup)

Author: @smawson Added [a comment](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/4776#issuecomment-522798397) about automation.

> ## Deploy private gateways for cross-cluster communication (one-time setup)

Author: @smawson Using this opportunity, as a next step, where would you recommend to put the automation/script? cc @esnible @mbanikazemi

> ## Deploy private gateways for cross-cluster communication (one-time setup)

Reviewer 3: Somewhere in istio ecosystem?

recommends protecting of such a boundary in _Appendix G, Authorization Boundary Considerations_:

{{< quote >}}
Dividing a system into subsystems (i.e., divide and conquer) facilitates a targeted application of controls to achieve
adequate security, protection of individual privacy, and a cost-effective risk management process. Dividing complex
systems into subsystems also supports the important security concepts of domain separation and network segmentation,
which can be significant when dealing with high value assets. When systems are divided into subsystems, organizations
may choose to develop individual subsystem security and privacy plans or address the system and subsystems in the same
security and privacy plans.
Information security and privacy architectures play a key part in the process of dividing complex systems into
subsystems. This includes monitoring and controlling communications at internal boundaries among subsystems and
selecting, allocating, and implementing controls that meet or exceed the security and privacy requirements of the
constituent subsystems.
{{< /quote >}}

> The approach I propose in this blog post facilitates division of a system into subsystems with different security and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The approach I use in this blog post facilitates division of a system into subsystems with different security and
```

compliance requirements, and facilitates the boundary protection.
You put each subsystem into a separate Kubernetes cluster, preferably on a separate network. You install
a dedicated Istio control plane into each cluster and connect the Istio meshes using ingress and egress gateways.
The gateways monitor and control cross-cluster traffic at the boundary of each cluster.

> ## Features of the proposed approach

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Features of the approach
```

> The approach I propose has the following features:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The approach I use has the following features:
```

- **common trust may not exist**. The Istio sidecars in one cluster may not trust the Citadel certificates in other
cluster, due to some security requirement or due to the fact that the cluster owners did not initially plan to couple
the clusters.
- **service location transparency**: consuming services send requests to the exposed services in remote clusters using
local service names. The consuming services are oblivious to the fact that some of the destinations are in remote
clusters and some are local services. The access is uniform, using the local service names of Kubernetes, for example `reviews.default.svc.cluster.local`.

While **expose-nothing by default** and **boundary protection** are required to facilitate compliance and improve
security, **non-uniform naming** and **common trust may not exist** are required when connecting
clusters of different organizations, or of an organization that cannot enforce uniform naming or cannot or may not
establish common trust between the clusters. **Service location transparency** is important since you do not want to
change the code of your applications when the location of the consumed services changes.

> ## The proposed implementation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The implementation pattern
```

> I propose to base connecting isolated clusters on the following principles:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I connect isolated clusters based on the following principles:
```

    RBAC: access denied
    Response code: 403
    {{< /text >}}

### Enable RBAC on the ingress gateway

1.  Currently, the only identities Istio RBAC can handle are the identities of Istio mutual TLS. In this case, you want
    to control the traffic for non-Istio mutual TLS from external clusters. To do that, you can use Envoy's filter [`envoy.filters.http.rbac`](https://www.envoyproxy.io/docs/envoy/latest/configuration/http_filters/rbac_filter).
    To instruct Istio to use that filter, create an
    [`EnvoyFilter`](/docs/reference/config/networking/v1alpha3/envoy-filter/):

    {{< text bash >}}
    $ kubectl apply  --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -n istio-private-gateways -f - <<EOF
    apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
    kind: EnvoyFilter
    metadata:
      name: private-ingress-rbac
    spec:
      workloadLabels:
        istio: private-ingressgateway
      filters:
      - filterName: envoy.filters.http.rbac
        filterType: HTTP
        listenerMatch:
          portNumber: 15443

>   

Reviewer 2: some of the process could clearly benefit from automation. The term "Mesh Federation", and possible support for it, is currently being discussed by the Istio community. Hopefully automation for a pattern, or patterns, similar the one I showed here will be provided by Istio in the not too distant future.

    /etc/istio/c1.example.com/certs:
    total 4
    drwxrwxrwt 3 root root  120 Jul 29 00:27 .
    drwxr-xr-x 3 root root 4096 Jul 29 00:27 ..
    drwxr-xr-x 2 root root   80 Jul 29 00:27 ..2019_07_29_00_27_05.153388454
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root   31 Jul 29 00:27 ..data -> ..2019_07_29_00_27_05.153388454
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root   14 Jul 29 00:27 tls.crt -> ..data/tls.crt
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root   14 Jul 29 00:27 tls.key -> ..data/tls.key

    /etc/istio/example.com/certs:
    total 4
    drwxrwxrwt 3 root root  100 Jul 29 00:27 .
    drwxr-xr-x 3 root root 4096 Jul 29 00:27 ..
    drwxr-xr-x 2 root root   60 Jul 29 00:27 ..2019_07_29_00_27_05.678454477
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root   31 Jul 29 00:27 ..data -> ..2019_07_29_00_27_05.678454477
    lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root   22 Jul 29 00:27 example.com.crt -> ..data/example.com.crt
    {{< /text >}}

### Deploy a private ingress gateway in the second cluster

1.  Create the `istio-private-gateways` namespace:

    {{< text bash >}}

>     $ kubectl apply --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 -f - <<EOF

Reviewer 4: Why not the one liner `kubectl --context=$CTX_CLUSTER2 create namespace istio-private-gateways` whenever you need to create a namespace?

Author: @esnible This is done to prevent an error if the command to create the namespace is run twice in the case of a single cluster (once for CTX_CLUSTER1 and once for CTX_CLUSTER2, which is the same cluster in case of the single cluster).

BTW, running the instructions on a single cluster was your idea and I like it very much. All the instructions can be checked and tested on a single cluster, and it is actually an example of isolation of namespaces within the same cluster.
